---
title: Unofficial Rockbox builds
description: Unofficial Rockbox builds with accessibility enhancements and fixes.
keywords: accessibility,Rockbox,audio player,alternative firmware
language: en
---

[Summary of changes against the official versions](summary.md)
[Some additional functions description](features.md)

----

I use the Rockbox software on my Cowon iAudio X5L player for
several years and now on Sansa Clip+ as well with great
pleasure. During this time I occasionally tried to improve it's
functionality in some aspects to make it yet better fitting my
needs. The results of these activities are represented here.

See [the project homepage](http://www.rockbox.org/)
for official Rockbox releases, accompanying documentation and other
useful resources related to this excellent software, but here you can
find only my apocryphal builds, information about the applied patches
and some additional stuff.

----

## Rockbox builds {#anchor1}

Release date: **{{ site.data.rockbox.release_date }}**.

These builds are based on the master branch of the
[Rockbox development source](http://git.rockbox.org/)
and include a bunch of
[fixes and enhancements](summary.md)
as well as the latest main project updates up to build date. Summary
of the master changes history is available
[here](http://www.rockbox.org/wiki/MajorChanges).

All fonts and English voice generated by
[Mbrola](https://github.com/numediart/MBROLA)
speech synthesizer are included. Being downloaded and properly
installed on a device all this should work just out of the box. In
addition, auto-generated Russian voice is provided for each build as a
separate archive. Simply unpack it alongside the respective Rockbox
build if you need.

Choose an appropriate build for your architecture:

{% capture release_url -%}
https://github.com/poretsky/rockbox/releases/download/v{{ site.data.rockbox.version }}
{%- endcapture %}

{% for build in site.data.rockbox.builds %}

{% capture signature -%}
{{ build.id }}-{{ site.data.rockbox.version }}
{%- endcapture %}

### {{ build.title }}

- Rockbox firmware:
  [rockbox-{{ signature }}.zip]({{ release_url }}/rockbox-{{ signature }}.zip)
- Russian voice:
  [{{ signature }}-russian.zip]({{ release_url }}/{{ signature }}-russian.zip)
{% if build.has_doc -%}
- User manual:
  [rockbox-manual-{{ signature }}.pdf]({{ release_url }}/rockbox-manual-{{ signature }}.pdf)
{%- endif %}

{% endfor %}

## Note for those users who are interested in speech interface

In all these builds speech feedback initially is turned on only for
menu. But some menu sections, such as font or language choice, in
fact, are implemented as file lists. To make them speaking as well, it
is necessary to go to `Settings` / `General settings` / `Voice`, choose
`Spell` for `Voice directories` and `Voice file names` and enable using talk
clips both for directories and files.

----

Since personally I use Sansa Clip+ and Cowon iAudio X5, all fixes and
additions are tested by me only on these architectures. Other builds
were created for my friends who like these improvements and asked me
to do that.

----

{% assign assets_url="https://github.com/poretsky/poretsky.github.io/releases/download/assets" %}

## Additional goodies

### Alternative bootloader for Cowon iAudio X5

Since the official Rockbox bootloader for Cowon iAudio X5 player
overrides the original firmware, I prefer
[the alternative one]({{ assets_url }}/x5_dualboot_RB_fw-2.10E.zip)
that allows to keep Rockbox along with the original firmware. See the
README file included into the archive for details.

### Playing midi-files

Although Rockbox natively supports a bunch of sound file formats, but
if you want it to be able to play midi-files as well, grab
[this archive](http://download.rockbox.org/useful/midi-patchset.tbz2)
and unpack it in the `.rockbox` folder on your player after
Rockbox installation. It should be enough.

### Creating voice thumbnails

The [voicebox]({{ assets_url }}/voicebox) shell script is designed
to make voice thumbnails for file names and FM radio presets on a
Linux machine. It makes use of the [rbspeak]({{ assets_url }}/rbspeak)
shell script for actual speech synthesis. This script in turn uses
Mbrola speech synthesizer for producing English speech and Ru_tts
engine for Russian. See embedded comments for more details. To
compress produced sound the [rbspeexenc]({{ assets_url }}/rbspeexenc)
program is used that was generated from the Rockbox sources.

On **Debian** and **Ubuntu** all necessary speech synthesizers can be
installed from
[my repository](../packages/index.md)
by command:

```bash
$ sudo aptitude install mbrola mbrola-en1 freephone enlex ru-tts rulex
```

An extra advantage of this tool is that it uses different voice pitch
for different objects, thus, folders and files of various types are
distinguishable simply by voice.

### Talking FM radio presets

The FM radio presets pack for a bunch of cities (mostly Russian) along
with voice thumbnails is available [here]({{ assets_url }}/fmpresets.zip).
Downloaded archive should be unpacked in the `.rockbox` directory on
the device where Rockbox is installed. The voice thumbnails were
created by Russian and English speech synthesizers depending on the
alphabet used in the station names. The base information about radio
stations and their frequencies was taken from
[radiomap.eu](http://radiomap.eu).

### Recorder presets

In order to simplify switching from one source to another in recorder
I've created [basic presets]({{ assets_url }}/recpresets.zip)
for each one:

- voice -- record from microphone, place file into `/voice` directory,
  22 kHz mono compressed as mp3 64kbps;
- radio -- record from FM radio, place file into `/radio` directory, 44
  kHz stereo compressed as mp3 128 kbps;
- line -- record from line input, place file into `/record` directory,
  44 kHz stereo PCM wave format.

To make use of these presets grab the archive and unpack it into
`/.rockbox` folder on the device.

----

Feel free to e-mail me with all related questions and suggestions.

{% include feedback.html name=site.data.author.name.en %}
